**Filtered probability space** (AFM P14)

DEFINITION. A **filtration** $\mathbb{F}=\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ on the probability space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbb{P})$ is a collection of $\sigma$-fields such that $\mathcal{F}_{s} \subseteq \mathcal{F}_{t} \subseteq \mathcal{F}$ for all $0 \leq s \leq t$.



DEFINITION. A stochastic process $X=\left(X_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ is **adapted** to $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ iff the random variable $X_{t}$ is $\mathcal{F}_{t}$-measurable for all $t \geq 0$.

(AP P8) It is equivalent to require that $\mathcal{F}_{t}^{X} \subseteq \mathcal{F}_{t}$ for all  $t \geq 0$.

(Shreve II P98) There are two possibilities for the filtration $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ for a stochastic process. One is to let $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ contain only the information obtained by observing the process itself up to time t. (i.e. $\mathcal{F}_{t}^{X}=\mathcal{F}_{t}$). The other is to include in $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ information obtained by observing the process and one or more other processes. (i.e. $\mathcal{F}_{t}^{X} \subsetneq \mathcal{F}_{t}$).



DEFINITION. Given a stochastic process $X=\left(X_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$, the **natural filtration** of $X$, (or the filtration generated by $X$) is the smallest filtration for which $X$ is adapted. That is, it is the filtration $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}^{X}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ where
$$
\mathcal{F}_{t}^{X}=\sigma\left(X_{s}, 0 \leq s \leq t\right)
$$
Note that $\sigma(X_t)=\sigma\left(X_t^{-1}\left(\mathcal{B}\right)\right)=X_t^{-1}(\mathcal{B})$, since $\sigma\left(\xi^{-1}\left(\mathcal{A}\right)\right)=\xi^{-1}\left(\sigma\left(\mathcal{A}\right)\right)$.



**Martingale** (AFM P19)

DEFINITION. Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbb{P})$ be a probability space, let $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ be a filtration of sub-$\sigma$-fields of $\mathcal{F}$. A **martingale** relative to filtration $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ is an adapted stochastic process $M=\left(M_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ with the following properties:
- $\mathbb{E}\left(\left|M_{t}\right|\right)<\infty$ for all $t \geq 0$,
- $\mathbb{E}\left(M_{t} \mid \mathcal{F}_{s}\right)=M_{s}$ for all $0 \leq s \leq t$.

(AP P9) Note that every process which is a martingale with respect to the given filtration $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ is also a martingale with respect to its natural filtration $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}^{X}\right)_{t \geq 0}$. Note that if $\mathcal{H} \subseteq \mathcal{G}$ then $\mathbb{E}[\mathbb{E}(X \mid \mathcal{G}) \mid \mathcal{H}]=\mathbb{E}[\mathbb{E}(X \mid \mathcal{H}) \mid \mathcal{G}]=\mathbb{E}(X \mid \mathcal{H})$.



**Markov process** (An Intro to Option Pricing)

DEFINITION. Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbb{P})$ be a probability space,  let $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ be a filtration of sub-$\sigma$-fields of $\mathcal{F}$. A **Markov process** relative to filtration $\left(\mathcal{F}_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ is an adapted stochastic process $X=\left(X_{t}\right)_{t \geq 0}$ with the following properties (the following are equivalent):

1. $\forall f$ Borel-meas. $\forall 0 \leq s \leq t, \mathbb{E}[f(X_{t}) \mid \mathcal{F}_{s}]=\mathbb{E}[f(X_{t}) \mid X_{s}]$.
2. $\forall f$ Borel-meas. $\forall 0 \leq s \leq t, \mathbb{E}[f(X_{t}) \mid \mathcal{F}_{s}]$ is $\sigma\left(X_{s}\right)$-measurable.
3. $\forall f$ Borel-meas. $\forall 0 \leq s \leq t, \exists g$ Borel-meas. s.t. $\mathbb{E}[f(X_{t}) \mid \mathcal{F}_{s}]=g(X_{s})$.

[Discrete] for example, ask the three above properties to hold with

1. $\forall f$ Borel-meas. $\forall n \geq 0, \mathbb{E}[f(X_{n+1}) \mid \mathcal{F}_{n}]=\mathbb{E}[f(X_{n+1}) \mid X_{n}]$.
2. $\forall f$ Borel-meas. $\forall 0 \leq k \leq n \leq N, \mathbb{E}[f(X_{n},X_{n+1},\ldots,X_{N}) \mid \mathcal{F}_{k}]=\mathbb{E}[f(X_{n},X_{n+1},\ldots,X_{N}) \mid X_{k}]$.



Martingale
$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{E}(X_{t+1} \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_t)
&=\mathbb{E}[\mathbb{E}(X_{t+1} \mid \mathcal{F}_{t}) \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_t]
\\
&=\mathbb{E}(X_{t} \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_t)
\\
&=X_{t}.
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$

$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{E}(X_{t} \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_s)
&=\mathbb{E}[\mathbb{E}(X_{t} \mid \mathcal{F}_{s}) \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_s]
\\
&=\mathbb{E}(X_{s} \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_s)
\\
&=X_{s}.
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$

Markov
$$
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{E}[f(X_{t+1}) \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_t]
&=\mathbb{E}[\mathbb{E}(f(X_{t+1}) \mid \mathcal{F}_{t}) \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_t]
\\
&=\mathbb{E}[\mathbb{E}(f(X_{t+1}) \mid X_{t}) \mid X_0,X_1,\ldots,X_t]
\\
&=\mathbb{E}[f(X_{t+1}) \mid X_{t}]
\\
&=g(X_{t}).
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
$$



**Brownian motion** (AFM P58)

REMARK. A Brownian motion is automatically a Brownian motion in its natural filtration.



**Stochastic Calculus** (Shreve II P132-134)

**Ito integral** (AFM P60-61)

THEOREM. Let $M$ be a continuous local martingale, and let $\alpha$ be an adapted processes such that
$$
\int_{0}^{t} \alpha_{s}^{2} \left(d M_{s}\right)^{2}<\infty \text { for all } t \geq 0,
$$
then there exists a continuous local martingale $X$ such that
$$
\sum_{i=1}^{n} \alpha_{s_{i}^{n}}^{n}\left(M_{s_{i}^{n}}-M_{s_{i-1}^{n}}\right) \rightarrow X_{t}.
$$
DEFINITION. Let $M$ be a continuous local martingale, and let $\alpha$ be an adapted process such that
$$
\mathbb{E}\left(\int_{0}^{t} \alpha_{s}^{2} \left(d M_{s}\right)^{2}\right)<\infty \text { for all } t \geq 0,
$$
the continuous martingale (also local) $X$ is called the **Ito integral** of $\alpha$ with respect to $M$ and is denoted
$$
X_{t}=\int_{0}^{t} \alpha_{s} d M_{s}
$$



**Ito isometry** (AFM P61)

PROPOSITION. Let $M$ be a continuous martingale. If $\mathbb{E}[\left(\int_{0}^{t} \left(d M_{s}\right)^{2}\right)<\infty$ for all $t \geq 0$ then
$$
\mathbb{E}\left(M_{t}^{2}\right)=M_{0}^{2}+\mathbb{E}\left(\int_{0}^{t} \left(d M_{s}\right)^{2}\right).
$$
In particular,

let $X_{t}=\int_{0}^{t} \alpha_{s} d W_{s}$ be the Ito integral of $\alpha$ with respect to a Brownian motion $W$ and $\mathbb{E}(\int_{0}^{t} \alpha_{s}^{2} d s)<\infty$, then
$$
\mathbb{E}\left(X_{t}^{2}\right)=X_{0}^{2}+\mathbb{E}\left(\int_{0}^{t} \alpha_{s}^{2} d s\right)=\mathbb{E}\left(\int_{0}^{t} \alpha_{s}^{2} d s\right).
$$



**Ito process** (AFM P62)
